ST. PAUL***





E-text prepared by Josephine Paolucci and the Project Gutenberg Online

Distributed Proofreading Team







REMINISCENCES OF PIONEER DAYS IN ST. PAUL



A Collection of Articles Written for and Published in the Daily

Pioneer Press.



By FRANK MOORE













NEWSPAPER STRUGGLES OF PIONEER DAYS.



A BRIEF NARRATION OF INCIDENTS AND EVENTS CONNECTED WITH THE EARLY

DAYS OF ST. PAUL, DAILY NEWSPAPERS.





If James M. Goodhue could revisit the earth and make a tour among the

daily newspaper offices of St. Paul he would discover that wonderful

strides had been made in the method of producing a newspaper during

the latter half of the past century. Among the first things to attract

the attention of this old-timer would be the web-perfecting press,

capable of producing 25,000 impressions an hour, instead of the old

hand press of 240 impressions an hour; the linotype machine, capable

of setting 6,000 to 10,000 ems per hour, instead of the old hand

compositor producing only 800 to 1,000 ems per hour, and the mailing

machine, enabling one man to do the work of five or six under the

old method. Think of getting out the Sunday Pioneer Press with the

material in use fifty years ago. It would take 600 hand presses, 600

hand pressmen and 600 boys three hours to print the edition, and as

there were no means of stereotyping in those days the forms would have

to be set up 600 times, requiring the services of 5,000 compositors.

Papers printed under these conditions would have to be sold for one

dollar each, and there would not be much profit in it at that. The

first daily papers printed in St. Paul were not conducted or a very

gigantic scale, as the entire force of one office generally consisted

of one pressman, five or six compositors, two editors and a business

manager. A few reminiscences of the trials and tribulations of the

early newspaper manager, editor and compositor may not be wholly

devoid of interest.



       *       *       *       *       *



In 1857 there occurred in Minnesota an election of delegates to the

constitutional convention to provide for the admission of Minnesota

into the galaxy of states. The election was so close, politically,

that when the delegates met there was a division, and the Republicans

and Democrats held separate conventions. At the conclusion of the work

of the two conventions the contract for printing was awarded to the

two leading papers of the state--the Pioneer and the Minnesotian--the

Pioneer to print the proceedings of the Democratic body and the

Minnesotian that of the Republican. This contract called for the

expenditure of considerable money for material with which to perform

the work. Mr. Moore, the business manager of the Minnesotian, went to

New York and purchased a Hoe press, the first one ever brought to the

state, and a large quantity of type; also a Hoe proof press, which is

still in use in the Pioneer Press composing room. When the book was

about completed the business manager of the Minnesotian was informed

that an injunction had been issued prohibiting him from drawing

any money from the state until the question of the right of the

Minnesotian to do any state printing had been determined by the

district court. Mr. Goodrich was state printer and claimed he had a

right to print the proceedings of both constitutional bodies. This

action on the part of the Pioneer produced great consternation in the

Minnesotian office, as most of the men had not received more than half

pay for some time, and now, when the balance of their pay was almost

in sight, they were suddenly compelled to await the slow and doubtful

action of the courts before receiving pay for their summer's work. The

district court, subsequently confirmed by the supreme court, decided

in favor of the Minnesotian, and the day following the decision Mr.

Moore, of the Minnesotian, brought down a bag of gold from the capitol

containing $4,000, and divided it up among his employes.



       *       *       *       *       *



In 1858, when the first Atlantic cable was laid, the news was

anxiously looked for, and nearly every inhabitant of the city turned

out to greet the arrival of the Gray Eagle and Itasca, two of the

fastest boats on the river, which were expected to bring the news

of the successful laying of the cable. The Gray Eagle started from

Dubuque at 9 o'clock in the morning and the Itasca started from

Prairie du Chien, about 100 miles farther up the river, at noon of the

same day. When the boats reached the bend below the river they were

abreast of each other, and as they reached the levee it was hardly

possible to tell which was ahead. One of the passengers on the Gray

Eagle had a copy of the Dubuque Herald containing the Queen's message,

tied up with a small stone on the inside of it, and as he threw it to

the shore a messenger from the Minnesotian caught it and ran up Bench

street to the Minnesotian office, where the printers were waiting,

and the Minnesotian had the satisfaction of getting out an extra some

little time before their competitors.



       *       *       *       *       *



In the summer season the newspapers had to rely, to a considerable

extent, on the steamboats for late Dubuque and Chicago papers for

telegraph news. There were three or four daily lines of steamers to

St. Paul, and every one of them could be distinguished by its whistle.

When it was time for the arrival of the boat bringing the newspapers

from which the different papers expected to get their telegraphic

news, messengers from the different offices would be at the levee, and

as the boat neared the shore they would leap for the gangplank, and

there was always a scramble to get to the clerk's office first.

James J. Hill and the late Gus Borup were almost always at the levee

awaiting the arrival of the steamers, but as they were after copies

of the boats' manifest they did not come in competition with the

adventurous kids from the newspaper offices.



       *       *       *       *       *



The Minnesotian was probably the first daily paper in the West to

illustrate a local feature. During the summer of 1859 a man by the

name of Jackson was lynched by a mob in Wright county, and Gov. Sibley

called out the Pioneer Guards to proceed to the place where the

lynching occurred and arrest all persons connected with the tragedy.

The Pioneer Guards was the crack military company of the state, and

the only service any of its members ever expected to do was in the

ballroom or to participate in a Fourth of July parade. When they were

called out by the governor there was great consternation in the ranks.

One of the members, who is still a prominent politician in the city,

when told that his first duty was to serve his country, tremblingly

remarked that he thought his first duty was to provide for his wife

and family.



A number of them made their wills before departing, as they thought

the whole of Wright county was in open rebellion. After being absent

for about a week they proudly marched back to the city without ever

firing a gun or seeing an enemy. The late J. Fletcher Williams was

city editor of the Minnesotian, and he wrote an extended account of

the expedition, and It was profusely illustrated with patent medicine

cuts and inverted wood type and border, the only available material at

that time that could be procured.



       *       *       *       *       *



The year 1859 was a memorable one in the political history of

Minnesota. Alexander Ramsey and George L. Becker, both now living in

this city, were the rival candidates for governor. The Republicans

made extraordinary efforts to elect their state and legislative

tickets, as both governor and United States senator were at stake.

Among the speakers imported by the Republicans were the Hon. Galusha

A. Grow of Pennsylvania and Hon. Schuyler Colfax of Indiana. Mr. Grow,

then as now, represented the congressional district in Pennsylvania in

which I formally resided, and I was very anxious to hear him, as the

first political speech I had ever heard was made by him in a small

village in Pennsylvania. The speakers were announced to speak at the

old People's theater, on the corner of Fourth and St. Peter streets,

and I was among the first to enter. The theater was packed to

overflowing. Mr. Grow had made a very interesting speech of about an

hour's duration, and Mr. Colfax was to follow for an equal length of

time. After Mr. Colfax had spoken about ten minutes an alarm of fire

was sounded and in less than fifteen minutes the entire structure was

burned to the ground. This happened about 9:30 o'clock in the

evening, and, strange to relate, not one of the morning papers had an

announcement of the fact the next day. The morning papers at that time

were something like an evening paper of to-day. They were set up and

made up in the afternoon and generally printed in the early part of

the evening. The result of that election was very gratifying to the

Republicans. I can see old Dr. Foster now writing a double column

political head for the Minnesotian, the first two lines of which were:

"Shout, Republicans, Shout! We've Cleaned the Breech Clouts Out!"



Dr. Foster was the editor of the Minnesotian and was quite a power in

the Republican party. He wielded a vigorous pen and possessed a very

irascible temper. I have often seen him perform some Horace Greeley

antics in the composing room of the old Minnesotian. At the time of

the execution of John Brown for his attempted raid into Virginia, I

remember bringing the Chicago Tribune to the doctor, containing the

announcement of the execution. I had arranged the paper so that the

doctor could take in the contents of the heading at the first glance.

The doctor looked at the headlines a second and then exclaimed, loud

enough to be heard a block, "Great God! In the nineteenth century, a

man hung for an idea!"



At another time the doctor became very much enraged over some news

that I had laid before him. In the early 50's Galusha A. Grow, of

Pennsylvania, introduced into the house of representatives the first

homestead law and the Republican party soon afterward incorporated

the idea into their platform as one of their pet measures. After

superhuman effort the bill passed the house of representatives, that

body being nearly tie politically, and was sent to the senate. The

Democratic majority in the senate was not very favorably impressed

with the measure, but with the assistance of the late President

Johnson, who was senator from Tennessee at that time, the bill passed

the senate by a small majority. There was great rejoicing over the

event and no one supposed for a moment that the president would veto

the measure. When I laid the Chicago Tribune before the excitable

doctor containing the announcement of Buchanan's veto the very air was

blue with oaths. The doctor took the paper and rushed out into the

street waving the paper frantically in the air, cursing the president

at every step.



       *       *       *       *       *



From 1854, the date of the starting of the three St. Paul daily

papers, until 1860, the time of the completion of the Winslow

telegraph line, there was great strife between the Pioneer,

Minnesotian and Times as to which would be the first to appear on the

street with the full text of the president's message. The messages of

Pierce and Buchanan were very lengthy, and for several days preceding

their arrival the various offices had all the type of every

description distributed and all the printers who could possibly be

procured engaged to help out on the extra containing the forthcoming

message. It was customary to pay every one employed, from the devil to

the foreman, $2.50 in gold, and every printer in the city was notified

to be in readiness for the approaching typographical struggle. One

year one of the proprietors of the Minnesotian thought he would

surprise the other offices, and he procured the fastest livery team In

the city and went down the river as far as Red Wing to intercept the

mail coach, and expected to return to St. Paul three or four hours in

advance of the regular mail, which would give him that much advantage

over his competitors. Owing to some miscalculation as to the time the

stage left Chicago the message was delivered in St. Paul twenty-four

hours earlier than was expected, and the proprietor of the Minnesotian

had the pleasure of receiving a copy of his own paper, containing the

complete message, long before he returned to St. Paul. The management

always provided an oyster supper for the employes of the paper first

out with the message, and it generally required a week for the typos

to fully recover from its effect.



       *       *       *       *       *



As an evidence of what was uppermost in the minds of most people at

this time, and is probably still true to-day, it may be related that

in the spring of 1860, when the great prize fight between Heenan and

Sayers was to occur in England, and the meeting of the Democratic

national convention in Charleston, in which the Minnesota Democrats

were in hopes that their idol, Stephen A. Douglas, would be nominated

for president, the first question asked by the people I would meet on

the way from the boat landing to the office would be: "Anything from

the prize fight? What is the news from the Charleston convention?"



       *       *       *       *       *



"The good old times" printers often talk about were evidently not the

years between the great panic of 1857 and the breaking out of the

Civil war in 1861. Wages were low and there was absolutely no money to

speak of. When a man did occasionally get a dollar he was not sure it

would be worth its face value when the next boat would arrive with

a new Bank Note Reporter. Married men considered themselves very

fortunate when they could get, on Saturday night, an order on a

grocery or dry goods store for four or five dollars, and the single

men seldom received more than $2 or $3 cash. That was not more than

half enough to pay their board bill. This state of affairs continued

until the Press was started in 1861, when Gov. Marshall inaugurated

the custom, which still prevails, of paying his employes every

Saturday night.



       *       *       *       *       *



Another instance of the lack of enterprise on the part of the daily

paper of that day:



During the summer of 1860 a large party of Republican statesmen and

politicians visited St. Paul, consisting of State Senator W.H. Seward.

Senator John P. Hale, Charles Francis Adams, Senator Nye, Gen. Stewart

L. Woodford and several others of lesser celebrity. The party came to

Minnesota in the interest of the Republican candidate for president.

Mr. Seward made a great speech from the front steps of the old

capitol, in which he predicted that at some distant day the capitol

of this great republic would be located not far from the Falls of St.

Anthony. There was a large gathering at the capitol to hear him, but

those who were not fortunate enough to get within sound of his voice

had to wait until the New York Herald, containing a full report of

his speech, reached St. Paul before they could read what the great

statesman had said.



       *       *       *       *       *



In the fall of 1860 the first telegraph line was completed to St.

Paul. Newspaper proprietors thought they were then in the world, so

far as news is concerned, but it was not to be so. The charges for

telegraph news were so excessive that the three papers in St. Paul

could not afford the luxury of the "latest news by Associated Press."

The offices combined against the extortionate rates demanded by the

telegraph company and made an agreement not to take the dispatches

until the rates were lowered; but it was like an agreement of the

railroad presidents of the present day, it was not adhered to. The

Pioneer made a secret contract with the telegraph company and left the

Minnesotian and the Times out in the cold. Of course that was a very

unpleasant state of affairs and for some time the Minnesotian and

Times would wait until the Pioneer was out in the morning and would

then set up the telegraph and circulate their papers. One of the

editors connected with the Minnesotian had an old acquaintance in the

pressroom of the Pioneer, and through him secured one of the first

papers printed. This had been going on for some time when Earle S.

Goodrich, the editor of the Pioneer, heard of it, and he accordingly

made preparation to perpetrate a huge joke on the Minnesotian. Mr.

Goodrich was a very versatile writer and he prepared four or five

columns of bogus telegraph and had it set up and two or three copies

of the Pioneer printed for the especial use of the Minnesotian. The

scheme worked to a charm. Amongst the bogus news was a two-column

speech purporting to have been made by William H. Seward in the senate

just previous to the breaking out of the war. Mr. Seward's well-known

ideas were so closely imitated that their genuineness were not

questioned. The rest of the news was made up of dispatches purporting

to be from the then excited Southern States. The Minnesotian received

a Pioneer about 4 o'clock in the morning and by 8 the entire edition

was distributed throughout the city. I had distributed the Minnesotian

throughout the upper portion of the city, and just as I returned to

Bridge Square I met the carrier of the Pioneer, and laughed at him for

being so late. He smiled, but did not speak. As soon as I learned what

had happened I did not do either. The best of the joke was, the Times

could not obtain an early copy of the Pioneer and set up the bogus

news from the Minnesotian, and had their edition printed and ready to

circulate when they heard of the sell. They at once set up the genuine

news and circulated both the bogus and regular, and made fun of the

Minnesotian for being so easily taken in.



       *       *       *       *       *



The Pioneer retained the monopoly of the news until the Press was

started, on the 1st of January, 1861. The Press made arrangements with

Mr. Winslow for full telegraphic dispatches, but there was another

hitch in the spring of 1861 and for some time the Press had to obtain

its telegraph from proof sheets of the St. Anthony Falls News, a paper

published in what is now East Minneapolis. Gov. Marshall was very much

exercised at being compelled to go to a neighboring town for telegraph

news, and one night when news of unusual importance was expected he

had a very stormy interview with Mr. Winslow. No one ever knew exactly

what he told him, but that night the Press had full telegraphic

reports, and has had ever since.



       *       *       *       *       *



Gov. Marshall was a noble man. When the first battle of Bull Run

occurred the earlier reports announced a great Union victory. I

remember of going to Dan Rice's circus that night and felt as chipper

as a young kitten. After the circus was out I went back to the office

to see if any late news had been received. I met Gov. Marshall at the

door, and with tears rolling down his cheeks he informed me that the

Union force had met with a great reverse and he was afraid the

country would never recover from it. But it did, and the governor

was afterward one of the bravest of the brave in battling for his

country's honor.



       *       *       *       *       *



Printers were very patriotic, and when Father Abraham called for

"three hundred thousand more" in July, 1862, so many enlisted that

it was with much difficulty that the paper was enabled to present a

respectable appearance. The Press advertised for anything that could

set type to come in and help it out. I remember one man applying

who said he never had set any type, but he had a good theoretical

knowledge of the business.



One evening an old gentleman by the name of Metcalf, father of the

late T.M. Metcalf, came wandering into the office about 9 o'clock and

told the foreman he thought he could help him out. He was given a

piece of copy and worked faithfully until the paper went to press.

He was over eighty years old and managed to set about 1,000 ems. Mr.

Metcalf got alarmed at his father's absence from home and searched the

city over, and finally found him in the composing room of the Press.

The old man would not go home with his son, but insisted on remaining

until the paper was up.



       *       *       *       *       *



Although Minnesota sent to the war as many, if not more, men than any

other state in the Union in proportion to its population, yet it was

necessary to resort to a draft in a few counties where the population

was largely foreign. The feeling against the draft was very bitter,

and the inhabitants of the counties which were behind in the quota did

not take kindly to the idea of being drafted to fight for a cause they

did not espouse. A riot was feared, and troops were ordered down from

the fort to be in readiness for any disturbance that might occur.

Arrangements for the prosecution of the draft were made as rapidly as

possible, but the provost marshal was not in readiness to have it take

place on the day designated by the war department. This situation

of affairs was telegraphed to the president and the following

characteristic reply was received: "If the draft cannot take place, of

course it cannot take place. Necessity knows no law. A. Lincoln." The

bitterest feeling of the anti-drafters seemed to be against the

old St. Paul Press, a paper that earnestly advocated the vigorous

prosecution of the war. Threats were made to mob the office. A company

was organized for self-defense, and Capt. E.R. Otis, now of West

Superior, one of the Press compositors at that time, was made post

commander. Capt. Otis had seen service in the early part of the war

and the employes considered themselves fortunate in having a genuine

military man for a leader. The office was barricaded, fifteen old

Springfield muskets and 800 rounds of ammunition was brought down from

the capitol and every one instructed what to do in case of an attack.

I slept on a lounge in the top story of the old Press building

overlooking Bridge Square, and the guns and ammunition were under my

bed. I was supposed to give the alarm should the mob arrive after the

employes had gone home. As there was no possible avenue of escape in

case of an attack, it looks now as if the post commander displayed

poor judgment in placing a lone sentinel on guard. But there was no

riot. The excitement gradually died away and the draft took place

without interruption.



       *       *       *       *       *



Before and some time after the war the daily newspapers took advantage

of all the holidays and seldom issued papers on the days following

Christmas, New Year's, Washington's birthday, Fourth of July

and Thanksgiving. On the Fourth of July, 1863, the Pioneer made

arrangements to move from their old quarters near the corner of Third

and Cedar streets to the corner of Third and Robert. It happened

that on that day two of the greatest events of the Civil war had

occurred--the battle of Gettysburg and the surrender of Vicksburg. The

Pioneer being engaged in moving their plant could not issue an extra

on that occasion, and the Press had the field exclusively to itself.

The news of these two great events had become pretty generally known

throughout the city and the anxiety to get fuller particulars was

simply intense. The Press, having a clear field for that day, did not

propose to issue its extra until the fullest possible details had

been received. A great crowd had assembled in front of the old Press

office, anxiously awaiting details of the great Union victories. I had

helped prepare the news for the press and followed the forms to the

press room. As soon as a sufficient number of papers had been printed

I attempted to carry them to the counting room and place them on sale.

As I opened the side door of the press room and undertook to reach the

counting room by a short circuit, I found the crowd on the outside had

become so large that it was impossible to gain an entrance in that

direction, and undertook to retreat and try another route. But quicker

than a flash I was raised to the shoulders of the awaiting crowd and

walked on their heads to the counting room window, where I sold what

few papers I had as rapidly as I could hand them out. As soon as the

magnitude of the news got circulated cheer after cheer rent the air,

and cannon, anvils, firecrackers and everything that would make a

noise was brought into requisition, and before sundown St. Paul had

celebrated the greatest Fourth of July in its history.



       *       *       *       *       *



I arrived in St. Paul on the morning of the 17th of April, 1858, and

Immediately commenced work on the Daily Minnesotian, my brother, Geo.

W. Moore, being part owner and manager of the paper. I had not been at

work long before I learned what a "scoop" was. Congress had passed

a bill admitting Minnesota into the Union, but as there was no

telegraphic communication with Washington it required two or three

days for the news to reach the state. The Pioneer, Minnesotian and

Times were morning papers, and were generally printed the evening

before. It so happened that the news of the admission of Minnesota was

brought to St. Paul by a passenger on a late boat and the editors of

the Pioneer accidentally heard of the event and published the same

on the following morning, thus scooping the other two papers. The

Minnesotian got out an extra and sent it around to their subscribers

and they thought they had executed a great stroke of enterprise. It

was not long before I became familiar with the method of obtaining

news and I was at the levee on the arrival of every boat thereafter.

I could tell every boat by its whistle, and there was no more scoops

'till the telegraph line was completed in the summer of 1860.



       *       *       *       *       *



During the latter part of the Civil war the daily newspapers began to

expand, and have ever since kept fully abreast of the requirements of

our rapidly increasing population. The various papers were printed on

single-cylinder presses until about 1872, when double-cylinders were

introduced. In 1876 the first turtle-back press was brought to the

city, printing four pages at one time. In 1880 the different offices

introduced stereotyping, and in 1892 linotype type-setting machines

were installed. The next great advance will probably be some system of

photography that will entirely dispense with the work of the printer

and proofreader. Who knows?









THE FIVE MILLION LOAN ELECTION.



EARLY STEAMBOATING--CELEBRATION OF THE SUCCESSFUL LAYING OF THE FIRST

ATLANTIC CABLE--A FIGHT BETWEEN THE CHIPPEWAS AND SIOUXS.





"Right this way for the Fuller house!" "Right this way for the Winslow

house!" "Right this way for the American house!" "Merchants hotel

on the levee!" "Stage for St. Anthony Falls!" These were the

announcements that would greet the arrival of travelers as they would

alight from one of the splendid steamers of the Galena, Dunleith,

Dubuque and Minnesota Packet company during the days when traveling

by steamboat was the only way of reaching points on the upper

Mississippi. Besides the above hotels, there was the Central house,

the Temperance house, the City hotel, Minnesota house, the Western

house, the Hotel to the Wild Hunter, whose curious sign for many years

attracted the attention of the visitor, and many others. The Merchants

is the only one left, and that only in name. Messengers from newspaper

offices, representatives of storage and commission houses, merchants

looking for consignments of goods, residents looking for friends, and

the ever alert dealers in town lots on the scent of fresh victims,

were among the crowds that daily congregated at the levee whenever the

arrival of one of the packet company's regular steamers was expected.

At one time there was a daily line of steamers to La Crosse, a daily

line to Prairie du Chien, a daily line to Dubuque and a line to St.

Louis, and three daily lines for points on the Minnesota river.

Does any one remember the deep bass whistle of the Gray Eagle, the

combination whistle on the Key City, the ear-piercing shriek of the

little Antelope, and the discordant notes of the calliope on the

Denmark? The officers of these packets were the king's of the day, and

when any one of them strayed up town he attracted as much attention as

a major general of the regulars. It was no uncommon sight to see six

or eight steamers at the levee at one time, and their appearance

presented a decided contrast to the levee of the present time. The

first boat through the lake in the spring was granted free wharfage,

and as that meant about a thousand dollars, there was always an

effort made to force a passage through the lake as soon as possible.

Traveling by steamboat during the summer months was very pleasant,

but it was like taking a trip to the Klondike to go East during the

winter. Merchants were compelled to supply themselves with enough

goods to last from November till April, as it was too expensive

to ship goods by express during the winter. Occasionally some

enterprising merchant would startle the community by announcing

through the newspapers that he had just received by Burbank's express

a new pattern in dress goods, or a few cans of fresh oysters. The

stages on most of the routes left St. Paul at 4 o'clock in the

morning, and subscribers to daily newspapers within a radius of forty

miles of the city could read the news as early as they can during

these wonderful days of steam and electricity.



       *       *       *       *       *



Probably no election ever occurred in Minnesota that excited so much

interest as the one known as the "Five Million Loan Election." It was

not a party measure, as the leading men of both parties favored it;

although the Republicans endeavored to make a little capital out of it

at a later period. The only paper of any prominence that opposed the

passage of the amendment was the Minnesotian, edited by Dr. Thomas

Foster. That paper was very violent in its abuse of every one who

favored the passage of the law, and its opposition probably had an

opposite effect from what was intended by the redoubtable doctor. The

great panic of 1857 had had a very depressing effect on business

of every description and it was contended that the passage of this

measure would give employment to thousands of people; that the

rumbling of the locomotive would soon be heard in every corner of the

state, and that the dealer in town lots and broad acres would again be

able to complacently inform the newcomer the exact locality where a

few dollars would soon bring to the investor returns unheard of by

any ordinary methods of speculation. The campaign was short and the

amendment carried by an immense majority. So nearly unanimous was

the sentiment of the community in favor of the measure that it was

extremely hazardous for any one to express sentiments In opposition to

it. The city of St. Paul, with a population of about 10,000, gave a

majority of over 4,000 for the law. There was no Australian law

at that time, and one could vote early and often without fear of

molestation. One of the amusing features of the campaign, and in

opposition to the measure, was a cartoon drawn by R.O. Sweeney, now

a resident of Duluth. It was lithographed and widely circulated. The

newspapers had no facilities for printing cartoons at that time. They

had to be printed on a hand press and folded into the papers. It was

proposed, by the terms of this amendment to the constitution, to

donate to four different railroad companies $10,000 per mile for every

mile of road graded and ready to iron. Work Was commenced soon after

the passage of the law, and in a short time a demand was made by the

railroad companies upon Gov. Sibley for the issuance of the bonds, in

accordance with their idea of the terms of the contract made by the

state. Gov. Sibley declined to issue the bonds until the rights of

the state had been fully protected. The railroad companies would not

accept the restrictions placed upon them by the governor, and they

obtained a peremptory writ from the supreme court directing that they

be issued. The governor held that the supreme court had no authority

to coerce the executive branch of the state government, but on the

advice of the attorney general, and rather than have any friction

between the two branches of the government, he, in accordance with the

mandate of the court, reluctantly signed the bonds. Judge Flandrau

dissented from the opinion of his colleagues, and had his ideas

prevailed the state's financial reputation would have been vastly

improved. Dr. Foster did not believe Gov. Sibley was sincere in his

efforts to protect the interests of the state, and denounced him with

the same persistence he had during the campaign of the previous fall.

The doctor would never acknowledge that Gov. Sibley was the legal

governor of Minnesota, and Tie contended that he had no right to sign

the bonds: that their issuance was illegal, and that neither the

principal nor the interest would ever be paid. The Minnesotian carried

at the head of its columns the words "Official Paper of the City," and

it was feared that its malignant attacks upon the state officials,

denouncing the issuance of the bonds as fraudulent and illegal, would

be construed abroad as reflecting the sentiment of the majority of the

people in the the community in which it was printed, and would have a

bad effect in the East when the time came to negotiate the bonds. An

effort was made to induce the city council to deprive that paper of

its official patronage, but that body could not see its way clear to

abrogate its contract. Threats were made to throw the office into the

river, but they did not materialize. When Gov. Sibley endeavored

to place these bonds on the New York market he was confronted

with conditions not anticipated, and suffered disappointment and

humiliation in consequence of the failure of the attempt. The bonds

could not be negotiated. The whole railway construction scheme

suddenly collapsed, the railroad companies defaulted, the credit of

the state was compromised, "and enterprise of great pith and

moment had turned their currents awry." The evil forbodings of the

Minnesotian became literally true, and for more than twenty years

the repudiated bonds of Minnesota were a blot on the pages of her

otherwise spotless record. Nearly 250 miles of road were graded, on

which the state foreclosed and a few years later donated the same to

new organizations. During the administration of Gov. Pillsbury the

state compromised with the holders of these securities and paid 50 per

cent of their nominal value. Will she ever pay the rest?



       *       *       *       *       *



In the latter part of May, 1858, a battle was fought near Shakopee

between the Sioux and the Chippewas. A party of Chippewa warriors,

under the command of the famous Chief Hole-in-the-day, surprised a

body of Sioux on the river bottoms near Shakopee and mercilessly

opened fire on them, killing and wounding fifteen or twenty. Eight or

ten Chippewas were killed during the engagement. The daily papers

sent reporters to the scene of the conflict and they remained in that

vicinity several days on the lookout for further engagements. Among

the reporters was John W. Sickels, a fresh young man from one of the

Eastern cities. He was attached to the Times' editorial staff and

furnished that paper with a very graphic description of the events of

the preceding days, and closed his report by saying that he was unable

to find out the "origin of the difficulty." As the Sioux and

Chippewas were hereditary enemies, his closing announcement afforded

considerable amusement to the old inhabitants.



       *       *       *       *       *



The celebration in St. Paul in honor of the successful laying of the

Atlantic cable, which took place on the first day of September, 1858,

was one of the first as well as one of the most elaborate celebrations

that ever occurred in the city. The announcement of the completion of

the enterprise, which occurred on the 5th of the previous month, did

not reach St. Paul until two or three days later, as there was no

telegraphic communication to the city at that time. As soon as

messages had been exchanged between Queen Victoria and President

Buchanan it was considered safe to make preparations for a grand

celebration. Most of the cities throughout the United States were

making preparations to celebrate on that day, and St. Paul did not

propose to be outdone. The city council appropriated several hundred

dollars to assist in the grand jubilation and illumination. An

elaborate program was prepared and a procession that would do credit

to the city at the present time marched through the principal streets,

to the edification of thousands of spectators from the city and

surrounding country. To show that a procession in the olden time was

very similar to one of the up-to-date affairs, the following order of

procession is appended:



THE PROCESSION.



  Escort of Light Cavalry.

  Band.

  Pioneer Guard.

  City Guard.

  City Battery.

  Floral procession with escort of Mounted Cadets,

    representing Queen Victoria, President Buchanan,

    the different States of the Union, and

    other devices.

  The Governor and State Officers in carriages.

  The Judges of the State in carriages.

  The Clergy.

  Officers of the Army.

  Officers of the Navy.

  The Municipal Authorities of Neighboring Cities.

  The Board of Education in Carriages.

  The Mayor and City Council.

  Knights Templars on Horseback.

  Band.

  Odd Fellows.

  Druids.

  Typographical Corps.

  Band.

  Officers and Crews of Vessels in Port.

  Turners.

  German Reading Society.

  German Singing Society.

  Attaches of Postoffice Department.

  Citizens in Carriages.

  Citizens on Horseback.

  Brewers on Horseback.

  Butchers on Horseback.



Col. AC Jones, adjutant general of the state, was marshal-in-chief,

and he was assisted by a large number of aides. The Pioneer Guards,

the oldest military company in the state, had the right of line. They

had just received their Minie rifles and bayonets, and, with the

drum-major headgear worn by military companies in those days,

presented a very imposing appearance. The Pioneer Guards were followed

by the City Guards, under Capt. John O'Gorman. A detachment of cavalry

and the City Battery completed the military part of the affair. The

fire department, under the superintendence of the late Charles H.

Williams, consisting of the Pioneer Hook and Ladder company, Minnehaha

Engine company, Hope Engine company and the Rotary Mill company was

the next in order. One of the most attractive features of the occasion

was the contribution of the Pioneer Printing company. In a large car

drawn by six black horses an attempt was made to give an idea of

printers and printing in the days of Franklin, and also several

epochs in the life of the great philosopher. In the car with the

representatives of the art preservative was Miss Azelene Allen, a

beautiful and popular young actress connected with the People's

theater, bearing in her hand a cap of liberty on a spear. She

represented the Goddess of Liberty. The car was ornamented with

flowers and the horses were decorated with the inscriptions

"Franklin," "Morse," "Field." The Pioneer book bindery was also

represented in one of the floats, and workmen, both male and female,

were employed in different branches of the business. These beautiful

floats were artistically designed by George H. Colgrave, who is

still in the service of the Pioneer Press company. One of the unique

features of the parade, and one that attracted great attention, was a

light brigade, consisting of a number of school children mounted, and

they acted as a guard of honor to the president and queen. In an open

barouche drawn by four horses were seated two juvenile representatives

of President Buchanan and Queen Victoria. The representative of

British royalty was Miss Rosa Larpenteur, daughter of A.L. Larpenteur,

and the first child born of white parents in St. Paul. James Buchanan

was represented by George Folsom, also a product of the city. Col.

R.E.J. Miles and Miss Emily Dow, the stars at the People's theater,

were in the line of march on two handsomely caparisoned horses,

dressed in Continental costume, representing George and Martha

Washington. The colonel looked like the veritable Father of His

Country. There were a number of other floats, and nearly all the

secret societies of the city were in line. The procession was nearly

two miles in length and they marched three and one-half hours before

reaching their destination. To show the difference between a line of

march at that time and one at the present day, the following is given:



THE LINE OF MARCH.



Up St. Anthony street to Fort street, up Fort street to Ramsey street,

then countermarch down Fort to Fourth street, down Fourth street to

Minnesota street, up Minnesota street to Seventh street, down Seventh

street to Jackson street, up Jackson street to Eighth street, down

Eighth street to Broadway, down Broadway to Seventh street, up Seventh

street to Jackson street, down Jackson street to Third street, up

Third street to Market street.



Ex-Gov. W.A. Gorman and ex-Gov. Alex. Ramsey were the orators of the

occasion, and they delivered very lengthy addresses. It had been

arranged to have extensive fireworks in the evening, but on account of

the storm they had to be postponed until the following night.



It was a strange coincidence that on the very day of the celebration

the last message was exchanged between England and America. The cable

had been in successful operation about four weeks and 129 messages

were received from England and 271 sent from America. In 1866 a new

company succeeded in laying the cable which is in successful

operation to-day. Four attempts were made before the enterprise was

successful--the first in 1857, the second in 1858, the third in 1863

and the successful one in 1865. Cyrus W. Field, the projector of the

enterprise, received the unanimous thanks of congress, and would have

been knighted by Great Britain had Mr. Field thought it proper to

accept such honor.



       *       *       *       *       *



Some time during the early '50s a secret order known as the Sons of

Malta was organized in one of the Eastern states, and its membership

increased throughout the West with as much rapidity as the Vandals and

Goths increased their numbers during the declining years of the Roman

Empire. Two or three members of the Pioneer editorial staff procured a

charter from Pittesburg in 1858 and instituted a lodge in St. Paul.

It was a grand success from the start. Merchants, lawyers, doctors,

printers, and in fact half of the male population, was soon enrolled

in the membership of the order. There was something so grand, gloomy

and peculiar about the initiation that made it certain that as soon

as one victim had run the gauntlet he would not be satisfied until

another one had been procured. When a candidate had been proposed for

membership the whole lodge acted as a committee of investigation,

and if it could be ascertained that he had ever been derelict in his

dealings with his fellow men he was sure to be charged with it when

being examined by the high priest in the secret chamber of the

order--that is, the candidate supposed he was in a secret chamber from

the manner in which he had to be questioned, but when the hood had

been removed from his face he found, much to his mortification, that

his confession had been made to the full membership of the order.

Occasionally the candidate would confess to having been more of a

transgresser than his questioners had anticipated.



The following is a sample of the questions asked a candidate for

admission: Grand Commander to candidate, "Are you in favor of

the acquisition of the Island of Cuba?" Candidate, "I am." Grand

Commander, "In case of an invasion of the island, would you lie awake

nights and steal into the enemy's camp?" Candidate, "I would." Grand

Commander, "Let it be recorded, he will lie and steal," and then an

immense gong at the far end of the hall would be sounded and the

candidate would imagine that the day of judgment had come. The scheme

of bouncing candidates into the air from a rubber blanket, so popular

during the days of the recent ice carnivals was said to have been

original with the Sons of Malta, and was one of the mildest of the

many atrocities perpetrated by this most noble order.



Some time during the summer a large excursion party of members of the

order from Cincinnati, Chicago and Milwaukee visited St. Paul.

Among the number was the celebrated elocutionist, Alf. Burnett of

Cincinnati, and Gov. Alexander Randall of Wisconsin. They arrived at

the lower levee about midnight and marched up Third street to the hall

of the order, where a grand banquet was awaiting them. The visitors

were arrayed in long, black robes, with a black hood over their heads,

and looked more like the prisoners in the play of "Lucretia Borgia"

than members of modern civilization.



On the following day there was an immense barbecue at Minnehaha

Falls, when the visitors were feasted with an ox roasted whole. This

organization kept on increasing in membership, until in an evil hour

one of the members had succeeded in inducing the Rev. John Penman

to consent to become one of its members. Mr. Penman was so highly

Indignant at the manner in which he had been handled during the

initiation that he immediately wrote an expose of the secret work,

with numerous illustrations, and had it published in Harper's Weekly.

The exposition acted like a bombshell in the camp of the Philistines,

and ever after Empire hall, the headquarters of the order, presented

a dark and gloomy appearance. The reverend gentleman was judge of

probate of Ramsey county at the time, but his popularity suddenly

diminished and when his term of office expired he found it to his

advantage to locate in a more congenial atmosphere.



       *       *       *       *       *



The Minnesotian and Times, although both Republican papers, never

cherished much love for each other. The ravings of the Eatanswill

Gazette were mild in comparison to the epithets used by these little

papers in describing the shortcomings of their "vile and reptile

contemporary." After the election in 1859, as soon as it was known

that the Republicans had secured a majority in the legislature, the

managers of these rival Republican offices instituted a very lively

campaign for the office of state printer. Both papers had worked hard

for the success of the Republican ticket and they had equal claims

on the party for recognition. Both offices were badly in need of

financial assistance, and had the Republican party not been successful

one of them, and perhaps both, would have been compelled to suspend.

How to divide the patronage satisfactorily to both papers was the

problem that confronted the legislature about to assemble. The war of

words between Foster and Newson continued with unabated ferocity. The

editor of the Minnesotian would refer to the editor of the Times

as "Mr. Timothy Muggins Newson"--his right name being Thomas M.

Newson--and the Times would frequently mention Dr. Foster as the

"red-nosed, goggle-eyed editor of the Minnesotian." To effect a

reconciliation between these two editors required the best diplomatic

talent of the party leaders. After frequent consultations between the

leading men of the party and the managers of the two offices, it was

arranged that the papers should be consolidated and the name of the

paper should be the Minnesotian and Times. It can readily be seen

that a marriage contracted under these peculiar circumstances was

not likely to produce a prolonged state of connubial felicity. The

relations between Foster and Newson were no more cordial under one

management than had hitherto existed when the offices were separate.

This unhappy situation continued until about the time the legislature

adjourned, when the partnership was dissolved. Dr. Foster assumed

entire control of the Minnesotian and Maj. Newson was manager of

the Times. George W. Moore was associated with Dr. Foster in the

publication of the Minnesotian prior to the consolidation, but when

the offices separated it was stipulated that Mr. Moore should have the

printing of the Journals of the two houses of the legislature as part

payment of his share of the business of the late firm of Newson,

Moore, Foster & Co., thus entirely severing his relations with the

paper he helped to found. After the arrangement was made it was with

the greatest difficulty that it was carried into effect, as Orville

Brown of Faribault had entered the field as a candidate for state

printer and came within a few votes of taking the printing to that

village. The Times continued under the management of Mr. Newson until

the first of January, 1861, when he leased the office to W.R. Marshall

and Thomas F. Slaughter, who started the St. Paul Daily Press with

its material. The Press proved to be too much of a competitor for the

Minnesotian, and in a short time Dr. Foster was compelled to surrender

to its enterprising projectors, they having purchased the entire

plant. This ended the rivalry between the two Republican dailies. Dr.

Foster and Maj. Newson, some time afterward, received commissions in

the volunteer service of the army during the Civil war, and George W.

Moore was appointed collector of the port of St. Paul, a position he

held for more than twenty years.



       *       *       *       *       *



Does any one remember that St. Paul had a paper called the Daily North

Star? The historians of St. Paul and Ramsey county do not seem to ever

have chronicled the existence of this sprightly little sheet. During

the presidential campaign of 1860 we had two kinds of Democrats--the

Douglas and the Breckinridge or administration Democrats. There

were only two papers in the state that espoused the cause of

Mr. Breckinridge--the Chatfield Democrat and the Henderson

Independent--and as they had been designated by the president to

publish such portion of the acts of congress as it was customary

to print at that time, it was quite natural that they carried the

administration colors at the head of their columns. They were called

"bread and butter papers." The supporters of Mr. Breckinridge thought

their cause would present a more respectable appearance if they had an

organ at the capital of the state. Accordingly the late H.H. Young,

the editor of the Henderson Independent, was brought down from that

village and the Daily North Star soon made its appearance. It was not

necessary at that time to procure the Associated Press dispatches, a

perfecting press and linotype machines before embarking in a daily

newspaper enterprise, as a Washington hand press and five or six

cases of type were all that were necessary. This paper was published

regularly until after election, and as the returns indicated that the

officeholders would not much longer contribute toward its support it

soon collapsed.



St. Paul had another paper that is very seldom mentioned in newspaper

history. It was called the St. Paul Weekly Journal, and was edited by

Dr. Massey, formerly of the Ohio Statesman and private secretary to

Gov. Sam Medary. This paper was started in 1862, but on account of its

violent opposition to the prosecution of the war did not meet with

much favor, and only existed about eight months.



       *       *       *       *       *



Some time during the year 1858 the Minnesotian office received about

half a dozen cases of very bad whisky in payment of a very bad debt.

They could not sell it--they could not even give it to any one.

Occasionally the thirst of an old-time compositor would get the

better of him and he would uncork a bottle. The experiment was never

repeated. Think of half a dozen cases of whisky remaining unmolested

in a printing office for more than two years. During the campaign

of 1860 the Wide Awakes and the Little Giants were the uniformed

political organizations intended to attract the attention of voters.

One dreary night one of the attaches of the Minnesotian office, and an

active member of the Wide Awakes, met the Little Giants near Bridge

Square as they were returning to their hall after a long march.

In order to establish a sort of entente cordiale between the two

organisations the Little Giants were invited over to the Minnesotian

office in hopes they would be able to reduce the supply of this

nauseating beverage. It was a golden opportunity. The invitation was

readily accepted, and in a short time fifty ardent followers of the

advocate of squatter sovereignty were lined up in front of a black

Republican office, thirsting for black Republican whisky. Bottle after

bottle, was passed down the line, and as it gurgled down the throats

of these enthusiastic marchers they smacked their lips with as much

gusto as did Rip Van Winkle when partaking of the soporific potation

that produced his twenty years' sleep. One of the cardinal principles

of the Democracy, at that time was to "love rum and hate <DW65>s." As

the entire stock was disposed of before the club resumed its line of

march, the host of the occasion concluded that at least one plank of

their platform was rigidly adhered to.









THE GREAT SIOUX OUTBREAK IN 1862.



NARRATION OF SOME OF THE EXCITING EVENTS THAT OCCURRED DURING THE

GREAT SIOUX OUTBREAK IN 1862--FORT RIDGELY, NEW ULM AND BIRCH

COULIE--OTHER DAY AND WABASHA--GREAT EXCITEMENT IN ST. PAUL.





In July and August, 1862, President Lincoln issued proclamations

calling for the enlistment of 600,000 volunteers for the purpose of

reinforcing the army, then vainly endeavoring to suppress the Southern

rebellion. It was probably one of the most gloomy periods in the

history of the Civil war. McClellan had been compelled to make a

precipitous and disastrous retreat from the vicinity of Richmond;

the army of Northern Virginia under Pope had met with several severe

reverses; the armies in the West under Grant, Buell and Curtis had not

been able to make any progress toward the heart of the Confederacy;

rebel marauders under Morgan were spreading desolation and ruin in

Kentucky and Ohio; rebel privateers were daily eluding the vigilant

watch of the navy and escaping to Europe with loads of cotton, which

they readily disposed of and returned with arms and ammunition to aid

in the prosecution of their cause. France was preparing to invade

Mexico with a large army for the purpose of forcing the establishment

of a monarchical form of government upon the people of our sister

republic; the sympathies of all the great powers of Europe, save

Russia, were plainly manifested by outspoken utterances favorable to

the success of the Confederate cause; rumors of foreign intervention

in behalf of the South were daily circulated; the enemies of the

government in the North were especially active in their efforts

to prevent the enlistment of men under the call of the president;

conspiracies for burning Northern cities had been unearthed by

government detectives, and emissaries from the South were endeavoring

to spread disease and pestilence throughout the loyal North. It was

during this critical period in the great struggle for the suppression

of the Rebellion that one of the most fiendish atrocities in the

history of Indian warfare was enacted on the western boundaries of

Minnesota.



       *       *       *       *       *



It can readily be seen that the government was illy prepared to cope

with an outbreak of such magnitude as this soon proved to be. By the

terms of the treaty of Traverse des Sioux and Mendota in 1851 the

Sioux sold all their lands in Minnesota, except a strip ten miles wide

on each side of the Minnesota river from near Fort Ridgely to Big

Stone lake. In 1858 ten miles of the strip lying north of the river

was sold, mainly through the influence of Little Crow. The selling of

this strip caused great dissatisfaction among the Indians and Little

Crow was severely denounced for the part he took in the transaction.

The sale rendered it necessary for all the Indians to locate on the

south side of the Minnesota, where game was scarce and trapping poor.

There was nothing for them to live upon unless they adopted the habits

of civilization and worked like white men. This was very distasteful

to many of them, as they wanted to live the same as they did before

the treaty--go where they pleased, when they pleased, and hunt game

and sell fur to traders. The government built houses for those who

desired to occupy them, furnished tools, seed, etc., and taught them

how to farm. At two of the agencies during the summer of the outbreak

they had several hundred acres of land under cultivation. The

disinclination of many of the Indians to work gradually produced

dissension among themselves and they formed into two parties--the

white man's party, those that believed in cultivating the soil; and

the Indian party, a sort of young-man-afraid-of-work association, who

believed it beneath the dignity of the noble Dakotan to perform

manual labor. The white man's, or farmer's party, was favored by the

government, some of them having fine houses built for them. The other

Indians did not like this, and became envious of them because they

discontinued the customs of the tribe. There was even said to have

been a secret organization among the tepee Indians whose object it was

to declare war upon the whites. The Indians also claimed that they

were not fairly dealt with by the traders; that they had to rely

entirely upon their word for their indebtedness to them; that they

were ignorant of any method of keeping accounts, and that when the

paymaster came the traders generally took all that was coming, and

often leaving many of them in debt. They protested against permitting

the traders to sit at the pay table of the government paymaster and

deduct from their small annuities the amount due them. They had at

least one white man's idea--they wanted to pay their debts when they

got ready.



       *       *       *       *       *



For several weeks previous to the outbreak the Indians came to the

agencies to get their money. Day after day and week after week passed

and there was no sign of paymasters. The year 1862 was the the second

year of the great Rebellion, and as the government officers had been

taxed to their utmost to provide funds for the prosecution of the war,

it looked as though they had neglected their wards in Minnesota. Many

of the Indians who had gathered about the agencies were out of money

and their families were suffering. The Indians were told that on

account of the great war in which the government was engaged the

payment would never be made. Their annuities were payable in gold and

they were told that the great father had no gold to pay them with.

Maj. Galbraith, the agent of the Sioux, had organized a company to go

South, composed mostly of half-breeds, and this led the Indians to

believe that now would be the time to go to war with the whites and

get their land back. It was believed that the men who had enlisted

last had all left the state and that before, help could be sent they

could clear the country of the whites, and that the Winnebagos and

Chippewas would come to their assistance. It is known that the Sioux

had been in communication with Hole-in-the-Day, the Chippewa chief,

but the outbreak was probably precipitated before they came to an

understanding. It was even said at the time that the Confederate

government had emissaries among them, but the Indians deny this report

and no evidence has ever been collected proving its truthfulness.



       *       *       *       *       *



Under the call of the president for 600,000 men Minnesota was called

upon to furnish five regiments--the Sixth, Seventh, Eighth, Ninth

and Tenth--and the requisition had been partially filled and the men

mustered in when the news reached St. Paul that open hostilities had

commenced at the upper agency, and an indiscriminate massacre of the

whites was taking place.



       *       *       *       *       *



The people of Minnesota had been congratulating themselves that

they were far removed from the horrors of the Civil war, and their

indignation knew no bounds when compelled to realize that these

treacherous redskins, who had been nursed and petted by officers

of the government, and by missionaries and traders for years, had,

without a moment's warning, commenced an indiscriminate slaughter of

men, women and children. It was a singular fact that farmer Indians,

whom the government officers and missionaries had tried so hard

to civilize, were guilty of the most terrible butcheries after

hostilities had actually commenced.



       *       *       *       *       *



A few days previous to the attack upon the whites at the upper agency

a portion of the band of Little Six appeared at Action, Meeker county.

There they murdered several people and then fled to Redwood. It was

the first step in the great massacre that soon followed. On the

morning of the 18th of August, without a word of warning, an

indiscriminate massacre was inaugurated. A detachment of Company B of

the Fifth regiment, under command of Capt. Marsh, went to the scene

of the revolt, but they were ambushed and about twenty-five of their

number, including the captain, killed. The horrible work of murder,

pillage and destruction was spread throughout the entire Sioux

reservation, and whole families, especially those in isolated portions

of the country, were an easy prey to these fiendish warriors.



       *       *       *       *       *



The Wyoming massacre during the Revolution and the Black Hawk and

Seminole wars at a later period, pale into insignificance when

compared to the great outrages committed by these demons during this

terrible outbreak. In less than one week 1,000 people had been killed,

several million dollars' worth of property destroyed and 30,000 people

rendered homeless. The entire country from Fort Ripley to the southern

boundary of the state, reaching almost to the mouth of the Minnesota

river, had been in a twinkling depopulated. How to repel these

invaders and drive them back to their reservations and out of the

state as they had forfeited all rights to the land they had occupied,

was the problem that suddenly confronted both the state and national

authorities.



       *       *       *       *       *



Shortly after the news of the outbreak at Redwood had been received,

word was sent from Fort Ripley to the effect that the Chippewas were

assuming a warlike attitude, and it was feared that the Sioux and

Chippewas--hereditary enemies--had buried the hatchet, or had been

influenced by other causes, and were ready to co-operate in an

indiscriminate massacre of the whites. Indian Agent Walker undertook

to arrest the famous chief Hole-in-the-day, but that wily warrior had

scented danger and suddenly disappeared, with his entire band, which

caused grave apprehension among the settlers in that locality, and

they were in daily dread of an attack from these hitherto peaceable

tribes.



       *       *       *       *       *



The suddenness with which the outbreak had occurred and the

extraordinary rapidity with which it spread, driving the defenseless

settlers from their homes and causing desolation and ruin on every

side, rendered it necessary for the governor to call an extra session

of the legislature for the purpose of devising means to arm and equip

volunteers, and assist the homeless refugees in procuring places of

shelter where they would be safe from molestation by these dusky

warriors. Could anything be more terrible than Gov. Ramsey's picture

of the ravages of these outlaws in his message to the legislature?

"Nothing which the brutal lust and wanton cruelty of these savages

could wreak upon their helpless and innocent victims was omitted from

the category of their crimes," said the governor. "Helplessness and

innocence, indeed, which would inspire pity in any heart but theirs,

seemed to inspire them only with a more fiendish rage. Infants hewn

into bloody chips of flesh or torn untimely from the womb of the

murdered mother, and in cruel mockery cast in fragments on her

pulseless and bleeding breast; rape joined to murder in one awful

tragedy; young girls, even children of tender years, outraged by

these brutal ravishers till death ended their shame; women held into

captivity to undergo the horrors of a living death; whole families

burned alive; and, as if their devilish fancy could not glut itself

with outrages on the living, the last efforts exhausted in mutilating

the bodies of the dead. Such are the spectacles, and a thousand

nameless horrors besides which this first experience of Indian

warfare has burned into the minds and hearts of our frontier people;

and such the enemy with whom we have to deal."



       *       *       *       *       *



The old saying that the only good Indians are dead ones had a noble

exception in the person of Other Day, who piloted sixty-two men,

women and children across the country from below Yellow Medicine to

Kandiyohi, and from there to Hutchinson, Glencoe and Carver. Other Day

was an educated Indian and had been rather wild in his younger days,

but experienced a change of heart about four years before the outbreak

and had adopted the habits of civilization. Other Day arrived in St.

Paul a few days after he had piloted his party in safety to Carver,

and in the course of a few remarks to a large audience at Ingersoll

hall, which had assembled for the purpose of organizing a company of

home guards, he said: "I am a Dakota Indian, born and reared in the

midst of evil. I grew up without the knowledge of any good thing. I

have been instructed by Americans and taught to read and write. This

I found to be good. I became acquainted with the Sacred Writings, and

thus learned my vileness. At the present time I have fallen into great

evil and affliction, but have escaped from it, and with sixty-two men,

women and children, without moccasins, without food and without a

blanket, I have arrived in the midst of a great people, and now my

heart is glad. I attribute it to the mercy of the Great Spirit." Other

Day had been a member of the church for several years and his religion

taught him that the Great Spirit approved his conduct.



       *       *       *       *       *



It was apparent that the Indian war was on in earnest. Ex-Gov. Sibley,

on account of his long familiarity with Indian character, was placed

in command of the troops ordered to assemble at St. Peter, and in

a few days, with detachments of the regiments then forming,

half-uniformed, poorly armed and with a scant supply of ammunition,

commenced offensive operations against the murderous redskins. The

newspapers and the people were crying "On to Ridgely!" which was then

beleaguered, with the same persistency as did Horace Greeyley howl "On

to Richmond!" previous to the disaster at Bull Run.



       *       *       *       *       *



Any one who has seen the thrilling realistic Indian play of "The Girl

I Left Behind Me" can form some idea of the terrible suspense of the

little garrison at Port Ridgely previous to being relieved by the

forces under command of Gen. Sibley. Fort Ridgely was a fort only

in name, and consisted of two or three stone and several wooden

buildings, surrounded by a fence, which did not afford much protection

when attacked by a large force. The garrison was under the command of

Lieut. T.J. Sheehan. His force consisted of about 150 men from the

Fifth regiment, fifty men of the Renville Rangers, and a number of

civilians. He was surrounded by 700 or 800 Sioux, fully armed and

equipped. Although there were only two attempts made to capture the

garrison by assault, yet the siege was kept up for several days. In

addition to about 300 refugees who had gathered there for support

and protection, the $72,000 of annuity money, which had been so long

expected, arrived there the day before the outbreak. After bravely

defending the fort for more than a week, the little garrison was

relieved by the arrival of about 200 mounted volunteers under command

of Col. McPhail, being the advance of Gen. Sibley's command. During

the siege many of the men became short of musketry ammunition, and

spherical case shot were opened in the barracks and women worked with

busy hands making cartridges, while men cut nail rods in short pieces

and used them as bullets, their dismal whistling producing terror

among the redskins.



Almost simultaneously with the attack on Fort Ridgely the Indians in

large numbers appeared in the vicinity of New Ulm, with the evident

intention of burning and pillaging the village. Judge Charles E.

Flandrau of this city, who was then residing at St. Peter, organized a

company of volunteers and marched across the country to the relief of

that place. The judge received several acquisitions to his force while

en route, and when he arrived at New Ulm found himself in command of

about 300 men, poorly armed and wholly without military experience.

They arrived at New Ulm just in time to assist the inhabitants in

driving the Indians from the upper part of the village, several

citizens having been killed and a number of houses burned. Two or

three days afterward the Indians appeared in large force, surrounded

the town and commenced burning the buildings on its outskirts. After

a desperate encounter, in which the force under command of Judge

Flandrau lost ten killed and about forty wounded, the Indians retired.

There were in the village at the time of the attack about 1,200 or

1,500 noncombatants, and every one of them would have been killed had

the Indian attack been successful. Provisions and ammunition becoming

scarce, the judge decided to evacuate the town and march across the

country to Mankato. They made up a train of about 150 wagons, loaded

them with women and children and the men who had been wounded in the

fight, and arrived safely in Mankato without being molested. Nearly

two hundred houses were burned before the town was evacuated, leaving

nothing standing but a few houses inside the hastily constructed

barricade. The long procession of families leaving their desolated

homes, many of them never to return, formed one of the saddest scenes

in the history of the outbreak, and will ever be remembered by the

gallant force under the command of Judge Flandrau, who led them to a

place of safety.



       *       *       *       *       *



As soon as Gen. Sibley arrived at Fort Ridgely a detail of Company A

of the Sixth regiment, under command of Capt. H.P. Grant of St. Paul,

and seventy members of the Cullen Guards, under the command of Capt.

Jo Anderson, also of St. Paul, and several citizen volunteers,

all under the command of Maj. Joseph R. Brown, was sent out with

instructions to bury the dead and rescue the wounded, if any could

be found, from their perilous surroundings. They were St. Paul

organizations and most all of their members were St. Paul boys. They

never had had an opportunity to drill and most of them were not

familiar with the use of firearms. After marching for two days, during

which time they interred a large number of victims of the savage

Sioux, they went into camp at Birch Coulie, about fifteen miles from

Fort Ridgely. The encampment was on the prairie near a fringe of

timber and the coulie on one side and an elevation of about ten feet

on the other. It was a beautiful but very unfortunate location for the

command to camp, and would probably not have been selected had it been

known that they were surrounded by 400 or 500 hostile warriors. Maj.

Brown had about one hundred and fifty men under his command. About 4

o'clock on the following morning the Indians, to the number of 500 or

600, well armed and most of them mounted, commenced an indiscriminate

fire upon the almost helpless little command. For two days they

bravely defended themselves, and when relief finally arrived it was

found that about half their number had been killed or wounded. When

the news of the disaster reached St. Paul there was great excitement.

Relatives and friends of the dead and wounded were outspoken in

their denunciation of the civil and military authorities who were

responsible for this great sacrifice of the lives of our citizens. It

was feared that the city itself was in danger of an attack from the

savages. Home guards were organized and the bluffs commanding a view

of the city were nightly patrolled by citizen volunteers. There was no

telegraph at that time and rumors of all sorts were flying thick

and fast. Every courier reaching the city would bring news of fresh

outrages, and our panic-stricken citizens had hardly time to recover

from the effect of one disaster before the news of another would be

received. Settlers fleeing from their homes for places of safety were

arriving by the score, leaving crops to perish in the field and their

houses to be destroyed. The situation was appalling, and many of our

citizens were predicting the most direful results should the army fail

to check the savage hordes in their work of devastation and ruin.



Every boat from the Minnesota river would be crowded with refugees,

and the people of St. Paul were often called upon to assist in

forwarding them to their place of destination.



Home guards were organized in almost every village of the threatened

portion of the state, but the authorities could not furnish arms

or ammunition and their services would have been of little account

against the well-armed savages in case they had been attacked.



Advertisements appeared in the St. Paul newspapers offering rewards of

$25 a piece for Sioux scalps.



       *       *       *       *       *



Gov. Ramsey endeavored to allay the apprehensions of the people and

published in the papers a statement to the effect that the residents

of the Capital City need not be alarmed, as the nearest approach of

the Indians was at Acton, Meeker county, 80 miles away; Fort Ripley,

150 miles away, and the scenes of the tragedy in Yellow Medicine

county, 210 miles distant. This may have been gratifying to the

residents of the Capital City, but was far from reassuring to the

frontiersmen who were compelled to abandon their homes and were

seeking the protection of the slowly advancing militia.



       *       *       *       *       *



About 12 o'clock one night during the latter part of August a report

was circulated over the northern and western portion of St. Paul that

the savages were near the city, and many women and children were

aroused from their slumber and hastily dressed and sought the

protection of the city authorities. It was an exciting but rather

amusing episode in the great tragedy then taking place on the

frontier. Rumors of this character were often circulated, and it was

not until after the battle of Wood Lake that the people of St. Paul

felt that they were perfectly safe from raids by the hostile Sioux.



       *       *       *       *       *



As soon as Gen. Sibley had collected a sufficient force to enable

him to move with safety he decided upon offensive operations. He had

collected about 2,000 men from the regiments then forming, including

the Third regiment, recently paroled, and a battery under command of

Capt. Mark Hendricks. The expedition marched for two or three days

without encountering opposition, but on the morning of the 23d of

September several foraging parties belonging to the Third regiment

were fired upon in the vicinity of Wood Lake. About 800 of the command

were engaged in the encounter and were opposed by about an equal

number of Indians. After a spirited engagement Col. Marshall, with

about 400 men, made a double-quick charge upon the Sioux and succeeded

in utterly routing them. Our loss was four killed and forty or fifty

wounded. This was the only real battle of the war. Other Day was with

the whites and took a conspicuous part in the encounter. After

the battle Gen. Pope, who was in command of the department of the

Northwest, telegraphed the war department that the Indian war was

over and asked what disposition to make of the troops then under his

command. This request of Gen. Pope was met with a decided remonstrance

by the people of Minnesota, and they succeeded in preventing the

removal of any of the troops until they had made two long marches

through the Dakotas and to Montana. Gen. Sibley's command reached Camp

Release on the 26th of September, in the vicinity of which was

located a large camp of Indians, most of whom had been engaged in the

massacres. They had with them about two hundred and fifty mixed bloods

and white women and children, and the soldiers were very anxious to

precede at once to their rescue. Gen. Sibley was of the opinion that

any hostile demonstration would mean the annihilation of all the

prisoners, and therefore proceeded with the utmost caution. After a

few preliminary consultations the entire camp surrendered and the

captives were released. As soon as possible Gen. Sibley made inquiries

as to the participation of these Indians in the terrible crimes

recently perpetrated, and it soon developed that a large number of

them had been guilty of the grossest atrocities. The general decided

to form a military tribunal and try the offenders. After a series of

sittings, lasting from the 30th of September to the 5th of November,

321 of the fiends were found guilty of the offenses charged, 303 of

whom were sentenced to death and the rest condemned to various terms

of imprisonment according to their crimes. All of the condemned

prisoners were taken to Mankato and were confined in a large jail

constructed for the purpose. After the court-martial had completed

its work and the news of its action had reached the Eastern cities,

a great outcry was made that Minnesota was contemplating a wholesale

slaughter of the beloved red man. The Quakers of Philadelphia and the

good people of Massachusetts sent many remonstrances to the president

to put a stop to the proposed wholesale execution. The president,

after consulting his military advisers, decided to permit the

execution of only thirty-eight of the most flagrant cases, and

accordingly directed them to be hung on the 26th of December, 1862.



       *       *       *       *       *



Previous to their execution the condemned prisoners were interviewed

by Rev. S.R. Riggs, to whom they made their dying confessions. Nearly

every one of them claimed to be innocent of the crimes charged to

them. Each one had some word to send to his parents or family, and

when speaking of their wives and children almost every one was

affected to tears. Most of them spoke confidently of their hope of

salvation, and expected to go at once to the abode of the Great

Spirit. Rattling Runner, who was a son-in-law of Wabasha, dictated the

following letter, which is a sample of the confessions made to Dr.

Riggs: "Wabasha, you have deceived me. You told me if we followed the

advice of Gen. Sibley and gave ourselves up, all would be well--no

innocent man would be injured. I have not killed or injured a white

man or any white person. I have not participated in the plunder of

their property; and yet to-day I am set apart for execution and must

die, while men who are guilty will remain in prison. My wife is your

daughter, my children are your grandchildren. I leave them all in your

care and under your protection. Do not let them suffer, and when they

are grown up let them know that their father died because he followed

the advice of his chief, and without having the blood of a white man

to answer for to the Holy Spirit. My wife and children are dear to me.

Let them not grieve for me; let them remember that the brave should be

prepared to meet death, and I will do as becomes a Dakotah."



Wabasha was a Sioux chief, and although he was not found guilty of

participating in any of the massacres of women and children, he was

probably in all the most important battles. Wabasha county, and

Wabasha street in St. Paul were named after his father.



After the execution the bodies were taken down, loaded into wagons and

carried down to a sandbar in front of the city, where they were all

dumped into the same hole. They did not remain there long, but were

spirited away by students and others familiar with the use of a

dissecting knife.



Little Crow, the chief instigator of the insurrection was not with the

number that surrendered, but escaped and was afterward killed by a

farmer named Lamson, in the vicinity of Hutchinson. His scalp is now

in the state historical society. Little Crow was born in Kaposia, a

few miles below St. Paul, and was always known as a bad Indian. Little

Crow's father was friendly to the whites, and it was his dying wish

that his son should assume the habits of civilized life and accustom

himself to the new order of things, but the dying admonitions of the

old man were of little avail and Little Crow soon became a dissolute,

quarrelsome and dangerous Indian. He was opposed to all change of

dress and habits of life, and was very unfriendly to missionaries and

teachers. He was seldom known to tell the truth and possessed very few

redeeming qualities. Although greatly disliked by many of the Indians,

he was the acknowledged head of the war party and by common consent

assumed the direction of all the hostile tribes in their fruitless

struggle against the whites.



       *       *       *       *       *



Between the conviction and execution of the condemned Indians there

was great excitement throughout the Minnesota valley lest the

president should pardon the condemned. Meetings were held throughout

the valley and organizations were springing into existence for the

purpose of overpowering the strong guard at Mankato and wreaking

summary justice upon the Indians. The situation became so serious

pending the decision of the president that the governor was compelled

to issue a proclamation calling upon all good citizens not to tarnish

the fair name of the state by an act of lawlessness that the outside

world would never forget, however great was the provocation. When

the final order came to execute only thirty-eight there was great

disappointment. Petitions were circulated in St. Paul and generally

signed favoring the removal of the condemned Indians to Massachusetts

to place them under the refining influence of the constituents of

Senator Hoar, the same people who are now so terribly shocked because

a humane government is endeavoring to prevent, in the Philippines, a

repetition of the terrible atrocities committed in Minnesota.



       *       *       *       *       *



The balance of the condemned were kept in close confinement till

spring, when they were taken to Davenport, and afterward to some point

on the Missouri river, where a beneficent government kindly permitted

them to sow the seed of discontent that finally culminated in the

Custer massacre. When it was known that the balance of the condemned

Indians were to be transported to Davenport by steamer. St. Paul

people made preparations to give them a warm reception as they passed

down the river, but their intentions were frustrated by the government

officers in charge of their removal, as they arranged to have the

steamer Favorite, on which they were to be transported, pass by the

city in the middle of the night. St. Paul people were highly indignant

when apprised of their escape.



Little Six and Medicine Bottle, two Sioux chiefs engaged in the

outbreak, were arrested at Fort Gary (Winnipeg), and delivered at

Pembina in January, 1864, and were afterward taken to Fort Snelling,

where they were tried, condemned and executed in the presence of

10,000 people, being the last of the Indians to receive capital

punishment for their great crimes. Little Six confessed to having

murdered fifty white men, women and children.



       *       *       *       *       *



One of the most perplexing problems the military authorities had to

contend with was the transportation of supplies to the troops on the

frontier. There were, of course, no railroads, and the only way to

transport provisions was by wagon. An order was issued by the military

authorities requesting the tender of men and teams for this purpose,

but the owners of draft horses did not respond with sufficient

alacrity to supply the pressing necessities of the army, and it

was necessary for the authorities to issue another order forcibly

impressing into service of the government any and all teams that could

be found on the streets or in stables. A detachment of Company K of

the Eighth regiment was sent down from the fort and remained in the

city several days on that especial duty. As soon as the farmers heard

that the government was taking possession of everything that came over

the bridge they ceased hauling their produce to the city and carried

it to Hastings. There was one silver-haired farmer living near the

city limits by the name of Hilks, whose sympathies were entirely with

the South, and he had boasted that all of Uncle Sam's hirelings could

not locate his team. One of the members of Company K was a former

neighbor of the disloyal farmer, and he made it his particular duty

to see that this team, at least, should be loyal to the government. A

close watch was kept on him, and one morning he was seen to drive down

to the west side of the bridge and tie his team behind a house, where

he thought they would be safe until he returned. As soon as the old

man passed over the bridge the squad took possession of his horses,

and when he returned the team was on the way to Abercrombie laden

with supplies for the troops at the fort. Of course the government

subsequently reimbursed the owners of the teams for their use, but in

this particular case the soldiers did not think the owner deserved it.



Gov. Ramsey's carriage team was early taken possession of by the

military squad, and when the driver gravely informed the officer in

charge that the governor was the owner of that team and he thought it

exempt from military duty, he was suavely informed that a power

higher than the governor required that team and that it must go to

Abercrombie. And it did.



       *       *       *       *       *



It was necessary to send out a large escort with these supply trains

and It was easier to procure men for that purpose than it was for the

regular term of enlistment. On one of the trains that left St. Paul

was a young man by the name of Hines. He was as brave as Julius

Caesar. He said so himself. He was so heavily loaded with various

weapons of destruction that his companions called him a walking

arsenal. If Little Crow had attacked this particular train the Indian

war would have ended. This young man had been so very demonstrative of

his ability to cope with the entire Sioux force that his companions

resolved to test his bravery. One night when the train was camped

about half way between St. Cloud and Sauk Center, several of the

guards attached to the train painted their faces, arrayed themselves

in Indian costume and charged through the camp, yelling the Indian war

hoop and firing guns in every direction. Young Hines was the first to

hear the alarm, and didn't stop running until he reached St. Cloud,

spreading the news in every direction that the entire tribe of

Little Crow was only a short distance behind. Of course there was

consternation along the line of this young man's masterly retreat,

and it was some time before the panic-stricken citizens knew what had

actually happened.



       *       *       *       *       *



In response to the appeal of Gov. Sibley and other officers on the

frontier, the ladies of St. Paul early organized for the purpose of

furnishing sick and wounded soldiers with such supplies as were not

obtainable through the regular channels of the then crude condition of

the various hospitals. Notices like the following often appeared in

the daily papers at that time: "Ladies Aid Society--A meeting of the

ladies' aid society for the purpose of sewing for the relief of the

wounded soldiers at our forts, and also for the assistance of the

destitute refugees now thronging our city, is called to meet this

morning at Ingersoll hall. All ladies interested in this object are

earnestly invited to attend. All contributions of either money or

clothing will be thankfully received. By order of the president,



"Mrs. Stella Selby.



"Miss M.O. Holyoke, Secretary."



Mrs. Selby was the wife of John W. Selby, one of the first residents

of the city, Miss Holyoke was the Clara Barton of Minnesota, devoting

her whole time and energy to the work of collecting sanitary supplies

for the needy soldiers in the hospitals.



Scores of poor soldiers who were languishing in hospital tents on

the sunburnt and treeless prairies of the Dakotas, or suffering from

disease contracted in the miasmatic swamps of the rebellious South

have had their hearts gladdened and their bodies strengthened by being

supplied with the delicacies collected through the efforts of

the noble and patriotic ladies of this and kindred organizations

throughout the state.



Many instances are recorded of farmers leaving their harvesters in the

field and joining the grand army then forming for the defense of the

imperilled state and nation, while their courageous and energetic

wives have gone to the fields and finished harvesting the ripened

crops.



       *       *       *       *       *



By reason of the outbreak the Sioux forfeited to the government, in

addition to an annual annuity of $68,000 for fifty years, all the

lands they held in Minnesota, amounting in the aggregate to about

750,000 acres, worth at the present time something like $15,000,000.

Had they behaved themselves and remained In possession of this immense

tract of land, they would have been worth twice as much per capita as

any community in the United States.









FIREMEN AND FIRES OF PIONEER DAYS.



A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE ST. PAUL, FIRE DEPARTMENT--PIONEER HOOK AND

LADDER COMPANY--HOPE ENGINE COMPANY AND MINNEHAHA ENGINE COMPANY--A

LARGE NUMBER OF HOTEL FIRES.





WHEN WE RAN WITH THE OLD MACHINE.



       *       *       *       *       *



  Brave relics of the past are we,

    Old firemen, staunch and true,

  We're thinking now of days gone by

    And all that we've gone through.

  Thro' fire and flames we've made our way,

    And danger we have seen;

  We never can forget the time

    When we ran with the old machine.



  In numbers now we are but few,

  A host have pased away,

  But still we're happy, light and free,

    Our spirits never decay

  We often sigh for those old days

    Whose memory we keep green,

  Oh! there was joy for man and boy,

    When we ran with the old machine.

                         --Gus Wiliams.



       *       *       *       *       *



Instruments for extinguishing fires were introduced in various parts

of Europe more than three hundred years ago. The fire laddies of that

period would probably look aghast if they could see the implements

in use at the present time. One of the old time machines is said to

consist of a huge tank of water placed upon wheels, drawn by a large

number of men, and to which was attached a small hose. When the water

in the tank became exhausted it was supplied by a bucket brigade,

something on the plan in use at the present time in villages not able

to support an engine.



The oldest record of a fire engine in Paris was one used in the king's

library in 1684, which, having but one cylinder, threw water to a

great height, a result obtained by the use of an air chamber. Leather

hose was introduced into Amsterdam in 1670, by two Dutchmen, and they

also invented the suction pipe at about the same period. About the

close of the seventeenth century an improved engine was patented in

England. It was a strong cistern of oak placed upon wheels, furnished

with a pump, an air chamber and a suction pipe of strong leather,

through which run a spiral piece of metal. This engine was little

improved until the early part of the last century.



In the United States bucket fire departments were organized in most of

the cities in the early part of the last century, and hand engines,

used by the old volunteer firemen, did not come into general use until

about fifty years later. The New York volunteer fire department was

for a long time one of the institutions of the country. When they had

their annual parade the people of the surrounding towns would flock

to the city and the streets would be as impassible as they are to-day

when a representative of one of the royal families of Europe is placed

on exhibition. At the New York state fairs during the early '50s the

tournaments of the volunteer fire department of the various cities

throughout the state formed one of the principal attractions. Many

a melee occurred between the different organizations because they

considered that they had not been properly recognized in the line of

march or had not been awarded a medal for throwing a stream of water

farther than other competitors.



A Berlin correspondent of the Pioneer Press many years ago, said that

when an alarm of fire was sounded in the city, the members of the fire

companies would put on their uniforms and report to their various

engine houses. When a sufficient number had assembled to make a

showing the foreman would call the roll, beer would be passed down the

line, the health of the kaiser properly remembered and then they would

start out in search of the fire. As a general thing the fire would

be out long before they arrived upon the scene, and they would then

return to their quarters, have another beer and be dismissed.



To Cincinnati belongs the credit of having introduced the first paid

steam fire department in the United States, but all the other large

cities rapidly followed.



       *       *       *       *       *



In the fall of 1850 the town fathers of St. Paul passed an ordinance

requiring the owners of all buildings, public or private, to provide

and keep in good repair, substantial buckets, marked with paint the

word "Fire" on one side and the owner's name on the other, subject

to inspection by the fire warden and to be under his control when

occasion required. The first attempt at organizing a fire brigade, was

made by R.C. Knox in the fall of 1851. Mr. Knox raised a small sum of

money by subscription, with which he purchased several ladders, and

they were frequently brought into requisition by the little band of

men whom Mr. Knox had associated with him. Mr. Knox was a man of

enormous stature, and it was said he could tire out a dozen ordinary

men at a fire.



       *       *       *       *       *



Two public-spirited citizens of St. Paul, John McCloud and Thompson

Ritchie, purchased in the East and brought to the city at their own

expense the first fire engine introduced in the Northwest. Although

it was a miniature affair, on numerous occasions it rendered valuable

assistance in protecting the property of our pioneer merchants. Mr.

Ritchie is still living, his home being in Philadelphia.



       *       *       *       *       *



In November, 1854, Pioneer Hook and Ladder Company No. 1 was organized

under provisions of the city charter. A constitution and by-laws were

adopted and the members agreed to turn out promptly on all occasions

of fire alarms. As compensation for their services they were excused

from jury duty, poll tax, work on the roads, or state military

service, for the period of five years. The original constitution of

the Pioneer Hook and Ladder company contained the following membership

roll: Foreman, Isaac A. Banker; assistant foremen, H.B. Pearson and

George F. Blake; treasurer, Richard Galloway; secretary, Robert Mason;

members, Henry Buell, John W. Cathcart, Charles D. Elfelt, Edward

Heenan, Thompson Ritchie, Philip Ross, Wash. M. Stees, J.W. Stevenson,

Benjamin F. Irvine, R.I. Thomson, John McCloud, J.Q.A. Ward, Charles

J. Williams. Of the above John McCloud is the only one living in the

city at the present time. Mr. McCloud was a member of the firm of

McCloud & Bro., hardware dealers, and they occupied the building on

the southwest corner of Third and Cedar streets.



This was the first full-fledged fire organization in the city, and as

Mr. McCloud took the initiative in forming this company he may justly

be called the "Father of the Volunteer Fire Department of St. Paul."



The old hook and ladder company was one of the representative

institutions of the city. From the date of its organization up to the

time of the establishment of the paid fire department many of the most

prominent men of the city were enrolled among its members. All of the

property of the company was owned by the organization, but in 1856,

having become somewhat financially embarrassed, their accounts were

turned over to the city and they were thereafter under the control of

the city fathers. At that time they possessed one truck, hooks and

ladders, and one fire engine with hose. Washington M. Stees was

made chief engineer and Charles H. Williams assistant. This scanty

equipment did not prove adequate for extinguishing fires and petitions

were circulated requesting the council to purchase two fire engines of

the more approved pattern, and also to construct a number of cisterns

in the central part of the city, so that an adequate supply of water

could be readily obtained. The city fathers concluded to comply with

the request of the petitioners and they accordingly purchased two

double-deck hand fire engines and they arrived in the city in August,

1858. They were soon tested and pronounced satisfactory. Our citizens

then congratulated themselves upon the possession of a first-class

fire department and they predicted that thereafter a great fire would

be a thing of the past.



One of the most irrepressible members of Pioneer Hook and Ladder

company in the early days was a little red-headed Irishman by the name

of A.D. Martin. He was foreman of the Daily Minnesotian office and he

usually went by the name of "Johnny Martin." Now Johnny always kept

his fire paraphernalia close at hand, and every time a fire bell

sounded he was "Johnny on